chore(docs): add chat and friends protocol RFC (#131)
decentraland/adr: content/ADR-131-chat-and-friends-protocol.md

---
layout: doc
adr: 131
date: 2022-11-16
title: Chat and Friends protocol
description: Document with chat and friends protocol definitions
type: RFC
status: Draft
spdx-license: CC0-1.0
authors:
  - guidota
---

# Abstract

> Most communications between the Explorer and Kernel, use a JSON based mechanism that we want to replace with RPC and a protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most communications between the Renderer and Kernel, use a JSON based mechanism that we want to replace with RPC and a protocol.
```

> Most communications between the Renderer and Kernel, use a JSON based mechanism that we want to replace with RPC and a protocol.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most communications between the Renderer and Kernel use a JSON-based mechanism that we want to replace with RPC and a protocol.
```

Chat and Friends features are using that mechanism and fixing or extending the functionality can be very hard to define and mantain.

> In this RFC, the interactions will be reviewed and a protocol for those features will be defined.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this RFC, the interactions will be reviewed, and a protocol for those features will be defined.
```

# Need

Nowadays, communication flows are very hard to document, fix, extend or even mantain. Changing a single field in a message can break the hole feature or the user session.
Also, JSON based messages deserialization are creating objects that then would be deleted by the Garbage Collector, affecting Explorer stability when there are a lot of them.

# Approach

> First of all, every feature flow should be identified in order to define the messages between Explorer and Kernel, then:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First of all, every feature flow should be identified in order to define the messages between Renderer and Kernel, then:
```

> First of all, every feature flow should be identified in order to define the messages between Renderer and Kernel, then:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First of all, every feature flow should be identified to define the messages between Renderer and Kernel, then:
```

- Review messages that are not Request-Response based
- Add chat and friends definitions to Decentraland Protocol (@dcl/protocol)
- Implement RPC Server on Kernel

> - Implement RPC Client on Explorer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Implement RPC Client on Renderer
```

## API definitions

> Worth noting that real time updates like chat messages or friend requests would be streamed, instead of using a request-response calls.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Worth noting that real-time updates like chat messages or friend requests would be streamed, instead of using a request-response call.
```

  rpc ReceiveMessages(ReceiveMessageRequest) returns (stream ChatMessage)
}
```

### Channels API

```protobuf
service ChannelsAPIService {
  // actions
  rpc CreateChannel(CreateChannelRequest) returns CreateChannelResponse {}
  rpc JoinOrCreateChannel(JoinOrCreateChannelRequest) returns JoinOrCreateChannelResponse {}
  rpc LeaveChannel(LeaveChannelRequest) returns LeaveChannelResponse {}
  rpc MuteChannel(MuteChannelRequest) returns MuteChannelResponse {}
  rpc MarkChannelMessagesAsSeen(MarkChannelMessagesAsSeenRequest) returns MarkChannelMessagesAsSeenResponse {}

  // queries
  rpc GetChannels(GetChannelsRequest) returns GetChannelsResponse {}
  rpc GetJoinedChannels(GetJoinedChannelsRequest) returns GetJoinedChannelsResponse {}
  rpc GetChannelMessages(GetChannelMessagesRequest) returns (stream GetChannelMessagesResponse {})
  rpc GetUnseenMessagesByChannel(GetUnseenMessagesByChannelRequest) returns (stream GetUnseenMessagesByChannelResponse {})

  // streams
  rpc GetChannelInfo(GetChannelInfoRequest) returns (stream GetChannelInfoResponse {})
  rpc GetChannelMembers(GetChannelMembersRequest) returns (stream GetChannelMembersResponse {})
}

```

### Friends API

```protobuf

> service FriendsAPIService {

Reviewer 3: the renderer should also request the initialization of the friend service, like chat. What do you think?

  // actions

>   rpc MarkMessagesAsSeen(MarkMessagesAsSeenRequest) returns MarkMessagesAsSeenResponse {}

Reviewer 3: the renderer should also request the initialization of the service, like chat. What do you think?

  rpc UpdateFriendshipStatus(UpdateFriendshipStatusRequest) returns UpdateFriendshipStatusResponse {}

  // queries
  rpc GetFriends(GetFriendsRequest) returns GetFriendsResponse {}
  rpc GetFriendsWithDirectMessages(GetFriendsWithDirectMessagesRequest) returns GetFriendsWithDirectMessagesResponse {}
  rpc GetPrivateMessages(GetPrivateMessagesRequest) returns (stream GetPrivateMessagesResponse {})
  rpc GetFriendRequests(GetFriendRequestsRequest) returns (stream GetFriendRequestsResponse {})
}

```

# Benefit

> De/serializing JSON can be very slow and waste a lot of time collecting the garbage. Using decentraland protocol and RPC would improve performance and mantainability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
De/serializing JSON can be very slow and waste much time collecting the garbage. Using Decentraland protocol and RPC would improve performance and maintainability.
```

> Also, developers would be talking in the same language and would not have to replicate definitions in both sides, making it reliable and secure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Also, developers would be talking in the same language and would not have to replicate definitions on both sides, making it reliable and secure.
```

In the same direction, these features can be extracted in the future into a service that would not run in the Kernel, simplifying code and improving performance.

> # Competition

Reviewer: Might add: Do nothing and continue using the JSON implementation with the before mentioned issues to performance and maintainability.

> Do nothing and continue using the JSON implementation with the before mentioned issues to performance and maintainability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Do nothing and continue using the JSON implementation with the before-mentioned issues for performance and maintainability.
```
